---
title: |
    <span id="h.lozhs2hilzr2" class="anchor"></span>Evaluating Strategies to
    Improve HIV Care Outcomes in Western Kenya
...

*Running Head: Strategies to Improve HIV Care Outcomes in Kenya (41
characters).*

*Author List: [TBC]*

***1** Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College
London, London, United Kingdom, **2** Faculty of Health Sciences, Moi
University, Eldoret, Kenya, **3** Center for Statistical Sciences, Brown
University, Providence, United States*

*Corresponding Author: [TBC]*

*Word Count = Aim is 4,000 words*

Abstract 
=========

Background:
-----------

Methods & Findings:
-------------------

Conclusions:
------------

Introduction (*1000 words*)
===========================

The predominant focus of HIV funding over the last decade has been on
improving access to antiretroviral therapy (ART); with the latest
reports indicating that over 9 million people are receiving ART in
sub-Saharan Africa{UNAIDS:2014ta}. With proper adherence, treatment can
increase life-expectancy such that it approaches that of an HIV-negative
individual{Nakagawa:2013cv}. Therefore, we might expect that with access
to ART, the life-expectancy of HIV-positive individuals would increase
dramatically; yet this does not appear to be the case, with life-years
still being lost to HIV in this thunderous
epidemic{Collaboration:2008ed}. Additionally, patients are initiating
ART late with CD4 counts far lower than current treatment guidelines
recommend (102 cells/μl at treatment initiation reported in South Africa
between 2001 and 2009, when guidelines recommend initiation when CD4
decreases below 200 cells/μl{Boulle:2014uj}), highlighting the potential
failures of pre-ART care{Boulle:2014uj}. The consequences of late
treatment initiation are grave for both the infected individual and
others that they may have transmitted the virus to, resulting in
suboptimal treatment outcomes. The meagre performance of these HIV care
systems has caught the attention of donors organisations, where budget
constraints are forcing a shift in focus towards maximising the
effectiveness of current ART-programmes[[*UNAIDS Gap Report
2014*](http://www.unaids.org/en/media/unaids/contentassets/documents/unaidspublication/2014/UNAIDS_Gap_report_en.pdf)].

Accumulating evidence suggests that HIV care is suboptimal not at one
particular point, but across all stages of ART-programmes, as “cascading
losses” have been reported throughout care{Rosen:2011ii}. However, this
issue is not just confined to sub-Saharan Africa; substantial losses in
care have also been reported in highly developed countries
too{Nachega:2014ks}. In 2011, a systematic review by Rosen and Fox
illustrated that, in sub-Saharan Africa, the median proportion of
patients retained from HIV testing to receipt of CD4 test results was
just 59%. Of the individuals that received CD4 test results, 46% were
retained until they were eligible for ART, and finally of those retained
until they were eligible for ART, 68% were retained until they initiated
ART. This review marked the first time that losses across the whole of
pre-ART care had been quantified on a large scale. Previous studies
assessing ART care in Mozambique illustrated that, 43.5% of patients
were lost between HIV-testing and enrolling in pre-ART care. Of those
that did enroll in pre-ART care, 22.9% were lost before receiving CD4
testing and of those who were found to be eligible for ART, 68.7% failed
to initiate ART{Micek:2009hs}. Addressing why patients disengage from
care, together with identifying means of returning them will improve
patient outcomes by allowing for the on-time initiation of ART and
retention in ART care.

Visualising the events and pathways taken by individuals through care is
important step in understanding where losses are occurring and how to
prevent them. Often termed, the “Cascade of Care”, this
conceptualisation of an ART-programme allows us to assess patient
outcomes and assign blame to events in time{Kilmarx:2013iy,
Hallett:2013ig}. The Cascade of Care begins with the identification of
HIV-positive individuals through HIV-testing. This involves the patient
seeking care voluntarily at a voluntary counselling and testing clinic
(VCT), or in a healthcare setting through provider-initiated counselling
and testing (PICT). Alternatively, the patient may be sought by a
home-based counselling and testing team (HBCT) and diagnosed in their
home. Alerting individuals to their HIV-status is still a challenge in
sub-Saharan Africa, with current estimates showing only 45% of people
living with HIV are aware of their status{UNAIDS:2014ta}. Kenya has made
progress towards its goal of 80% awareness of HIV status, with 72%
achieved in 2007{NASCOP:2012tp}. However, the marginal opportunity cost
of identifying individuals increases substantially as the pool of
undiagnosed HIV-positive individuals decreases. Additionally, gaining
insight into the drivers behind care-seeking behaviour may help inform
future HIV-testing strategies{Moses:1994tg}.

Once diagnosed, individuals need to be linked to pre-ART care; meaning
they must attend a clinic to be bled for a CD4 test in order to
determine their eligibility for ART. Kranzer *et al.* define linkage to
HIV care as attending for a CD4 count measurement within six months of
diagnosis to assess ART eligibility{Kranzer:2010hp}. In this study, they
found that among 885 individuals tested between 2004 and 2009 in Cape
Town, South Africa, 37.4% failed to link to care{Kranzer:2010hp}.

After successful linkage to care, where the patient is bled for an
initial CD4 count, the patient must return at a later date to receive
the results of the test. This is due to CD4 tests in sub-Saharan Africa
being predominantly lab-based, where the sample must be processed
centrally, with a turn around time of up to two weeks{Larson:2012dq}. In
resource-limited settings travelling to the HIV clinic is expensive and
may involve individuals having to take a day off work to travel from
remote areas, resulting in a decreased salary{Geng:2010fh}. A study by
Larson *et al*. (2010) found that among individuals who received CD4
tests at a clinic in Johannesburg, South Africa, and were not
immediately eligible for ART, 65% failed to return to receive the
results of their CD4 test within 12 weeks{Larson:2010dz}. Unfortunately,
insights into the role of care seeking behaviour are currently
relatively limited; unlike in tuberculosis (TB) research where several
studies have attempted to identify the drivers behind health care
seeking behaviour{Buregyeya:2011fi, Salaniponi:2000tc, Pronyk:2001uk}.
However, the distance and cost associated with travelling to an
HIV-clinic have already been cited as motives to disengage from
care{Geng:2010fh, Yu:2007wh, Ware:2009id}. In many cases, pre-ART care
can be rather prolonged, with the patient enduring multiple CD4 tests
and clinic visits prior to ART initiation. This can lead to
care-fatigue, where patients disengage with care as they are not
receiving any therapeutic benefit. This is backed up by findings from
Kenya, in which a CD4 count of \>200 cells/μl at enrollment into pre-ART
care was shown to result in a 3.49 fold increase in the odds of being
lost from care{Geng:2010du}.

Eligibility for treatment is determined by country-specific guidelines.
The latest guidelines published by the World Health Organization
released for adoption in June 2013 state ART should be initiated when a
patient’s CD4 count drops below 500
cells/μl{WorldHealthOrganization:2013we}. After receiving confirmatory
CD4 test results determining ART eligibility, patients must undergo
counselling before initiating ART. In some settings, owing to the
significant losses occurring upstream in pre-ART care, only 18% of
tested individuals have been shown to be successfully retained in care
until ART initiation{Rosen:2011ii}. Additionally, multiple large scale
studies have shown that CD4 counts of patients initiating ART to be far
lower than recommended treatment guideline values at the
time{Nash:2011ki, Boulle:2014uj}; therefore, indicating pre-ART care, in
many settings, to be poor at retaining healthy individuals until they
become eligible for treatment.

ART initiation marks the start of lifelong ART care, where a successful
treatment outcome can be achieved through retention in care and
adherence to ART. However, in sub-Saharan Africa between 46-85% of
patients are retained 24 months after initiation{Rosen:2007hd}. One
study of over 200 thousand individuals across sub-Saharan Africa showed
ART retention fell each year on treatment (77.4% at 12 months, 75% at 24
months, and 70.5% at 36 months), with attrition averaging 5% per year
after 24 months, highlighting long-term retention on ART as an obstacle
to achieving optimal patient outcomes in resource-limited
settings{Fox:2010gt}.

Substantial evidence now highlights deficiencies in both pre-ART and ART
care, challenging the traditional concept of linear flow through the
cascade, in which patients move sequentially between events. The
reported structural failures and discrepancies of current ART-programmes
therefore suggest that care is perhaps more cyclical than linear; with
this “churn” of patients engaging and disengaging over time{Gill:2009dj,
Hallett:2013ig, Miller:2014ba}. If patients’ initiate ART late, with
very low CD4 counts, after being lost from care, the route back into
care becomes an important target for interventions. We [*I had
originally said Hallett & Eaton, but perhaps it should say we?]* termed
these re-engagement routes as “side doors” into care, to supplement the
traditional “front door” route into care through which care naïve
individuals enter{Hallett:2013ig}. This “side door” distinguishes
patients with no previous care experience from those reconnecting with
care, thus allowing us to understand the different dynamics of these two
routes into care. Gaining insight into how these patients lost from care
re-engage, and how care-naïve individuals engage for the first time is
vitally important in terms of repairing and reinforcing care.

However, the drivers behind patients’ disengagement and reengagement are
ambiguous, and while it has been hypothesised that the development of
symptomatic HIV is likely to be key in pushing individuals to seek care,
data on individuals lost from care is scarce. Currently available
clinic-level data highlights the need for a consistent definition of
“lost to follow-up”, together with the need for high-resolution
longitudinal data that will enable us to map the individual pathways
taken by patients through care. A potential drawback of clinic-level
data is the perspective of the clinic, which can only provide details of
individuals who have engaged with care. There are likely to be many
HIV-positive individuals in the community who fail to seek or be engaged
in care, indicating that clinic-level data may be failing to realise the
scope of the issue.

Fortunately, a select few facilities in sub-Saharan Africa are beginning
to collect and distribute this type of data, thereby allowing us to
disentangle the web of routes through care and accurately calibrate
mathematical models to provide insight into the dynamics of the cascade
of care. In this paper we evaluate an ART-programme in western Kenya.
Through the use of mathematical modelling, we identify weaknesses
resulting in suboptimal patient outcomes and demonstrate how
interventions targeting different points of care can improve health
outcomes for patients.

Methods *(500 words)*
=====================

*Overview*

We constructed an individual-based micro-simulation to capture the
experience of individuals as they move through the various stages of HIV
care. The first step involved developing a mathematical model that
described the progression of HIV infection with declining health status
and associated mortality. This HIV Natural History model was then
expanded to capture the events that make up an ART-programme, the
so-called HIV Cascade of Care.

The Natural History model was calibrated using surveillance data from
the literature to accurately describe HIV progression and mortality
prior to ART initiation, followed by immunoreconstitution after ART
initiation. Calibrating the flow of individuals through HIV care in the
cascade model was undertaken by utilising high resolution longitudinal
data from AMPATH in western Kenya, thus allowing us to model the current
state of this specific ART-programme. To understand how costs accrue in
an ART-programme, data was sought that described the cost of the
individual components of care (e.g. Rapid HIV-test or pre-ART clinic
appointment).

To assess where care is suboptimal in this specific ART-programme in
western Kenya, the calibrated model was used to replicate the HIV
epidemic together with the scale up of treatment from 2004 onwards.
Output metrics are DALYs averted and cost between 2010 and 2030. In the
absence of any interventions, we were able to define baseline values for
impact and cost. We then explored the impact of a range of interventions
acting at various points along the care pathway. The impact of each
intervention in relation to the baseline scenario indicates the extent
to which health outcomes can be improved for patients, along with the
cost of these improvements.

Model description
-----------------

The mathematical model we constructed can be described as two submodels:
The Natural History Model and The Cascade Model. These two models work
to describe the health status of an HIV-positive individual and their
movements through care.

The Natural History Model is described in more detail in the appendix
but briefly, we model infection progression upon HIV acquisition in
terms of declining CD4 counts, the development of WHO Stage defining
conditions and associated mortality prior to ART initiation. Upon
initiating and adhering to ART, CD4 count decline reverses and the
individual recovers from their WHO Stage defining conditions. Mortality
hazards are associated with each health state, so as ART improves
health, the mortality hazard decreases. However, if an individual fails
to adhere to ART, their health declines as if they were not on ART.

The model describes the population of Kenya from 1970 to 2030 and begins
by creating a cohort of HIV-negative individuals the size and age of the
population in 1970. Population growth is captured through the birth of
new individuals over time. HIV incidence is driven by estimates from the
UNAIDS Spectrum Software (developed by the Futures
Institute[[*link*](http://www.unaids.org/en/dataanalysis/datatools/spectrumepp2013/)])
before being distributed and randomised to individuals in specific age
and sex categories informed by incidence rate ratios also extracted from
Spectrum. We start HIV testing in 2004 along with rolling out ART for
eligible individuals. We used the 2004 WHO Treatment Eligibility
Guidelines of a CD4 count \<200 or WHO Stage IV
{WorldHealthOrganization:2005ws}. This is updated in 2011 to a CD4 count
of \<350 or WHO Stage III/IV{WorldHealthOrganization:2010wj}.

The Cascade Model, shown in figure 1, describes the events and pathways
through care for HIV-positive individuals. Declining health in The
Natural History Model drives care-seeking behaviour in the Cascade
Model. As described above, the model begins with HIV-negative care naïve
individuals. Individuals are then tested from 2004 onwards through one
of three routes: HBCT where individuals are sought and tested at home,
VCT where individuals voluntarily attend an HIV-clinic or PICT where
individuals seek care due to being symptomatic or having had previous
healthcare experience. If an individual is found to be HIV-negative,
they do not progress any further through care. They may be tested
multiple times throughout their lives and care will only progress if
they are found to be HIV-positive. The model is described in detail in
the appendix.

<span id="h.iogg3anz8zdv" class="anchor"><span id="h.hslqb1xxus50" class="anchor"></span></span>Natural History Calibration
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Natural History Model was calibrated using surveillance data sourced
from the literature. A review of the literature was conducted to
identify relevant studies that would enable us to calibrate every aspect
of the Natural History Model. Where possible, data from cohort studies
was utilised; although, in some situations data from observational
studies was used. The full description of each data source used for
calibration and detailed methods can be found in the appendix.

Cascade of Care Calibration
---------------------------

To calibrate the Cascade Model describing the experience of HIV-positive
individuals as they move through the various stages of HIV care, we
utilised a unique high-resolution longitudinal dataset from western
Kenya. The Academic Model for Providing Access To Healthcare (AMPATH),
based in Eldoret, is made up of Moi University, Moi Teaching and
Referral Hospital and a consortium of North American academic health
centers led by Indiana University working in partnership with the
Government of Kenya.

Since launching in 2006, the AMPATH Medical Record System (AMRS) has
been collecting individual-level data on the AMPATH AIDS-control system,
which has been described as a model of sustainable
development{Einterz:2007js, Tierney:2007th}. Service delivery occurs
through public sector hospitals and health centers run by the Ministry
of Health{Einterz:2007js}. AMPATH has very well established VCT and PICT
programmes, and after trailing the use of HBCT in 2007, officially
rolled it out in 2010{Wachira:2013dc}. Recently, AMPATH is extending
this with their Find-Link-Treat-Retain programme (FLTR); involving
finding all HIV-infected individuals, linking each to care, treating
them with ART and retaining them in care for
life)[[*website*](http://news.medicine.iu.edu/releases/2014/05/ampath-abbvie-hiv-testing.shtml)].

AMPATH’s ability to look back at the care history of individual
patients, through tracing their unique identification number allowed us
to ask very specific questions regarding the flow of individuals through
care. Using data from the Port Victoria catchment area, data analysts at
AMPATH calculated the losses occurring at each stage of HIV care from
2007 to June 2014, and together with the average delay between each
event we were able to extract parameter values that were directly
inputted into the model, together with calibration points such as the
distribution of CD4 counts at ART initiation. Calibration was undertaken
systematically to ensure we were accurate in capturing the changing
dynamics of care. Full details of the Cascade Model calibration can be
found in the appendix.

Cost Derivation
---------------

The cost of the individual components of care was included in the model.
The majority of costs, including the cost of ART care, pre-ART clinic
visits and CD4 lab-based tests, were derived from the CHAI MATCH Study,
a multi-country analysis of 161 treatment facilities across five
countries in sub-Saharan
Africa[[*MATCH*](http://thedata.harvard.edu/dvn/dv/chaighf/faces/study/StudyPage.xhtml?studyId=85882&tab=catalog)].
The remaining costs were sourced from the literature. All costs were
adjusted for inflation and location by using the gross domestic product
deflator from the International Monetary Fund. Including the cost of the
individual components of care in the model allows us to understand how
costs accrue and compare in an ART-programme. Additionally, when
interventions are applied, we can see the financial implications of
improving care. Further details of the breakdown of cost in the model
can be found in the appendix.

Output Metrics
--------------

The output metrics from the model were DALYs averted and cost accrued
between 2010 and 2030. We weighted DALYs according to current
HIV-positive health state and ART status using weights from the Global
Burden of Disease Study 2010{Salomon:2012ib}. We also looked at the care
experience of individuals who died from HIV-related deaths between 2010
and 2030. Further details can be found in the appendix.

Assessing Losses in Care
------------------------

To assess the current state of our specific ART-programme in western
Kenya, we assessed the total number of DALYs and cost of care that
accrue between 2010 and 2030. This was conducted in the absence of HBCT,
so the only means of entering care was through VCT or PICT. HBCT was
removed as home-based counselling and testing is not currently found in
most ART-programmes in sub-Saharan Africa, therefore providing a more
representative baseline scenario.

The care experience of individuals who died from HIV-related deaths was
also studied in the baseline scenario to identify, for example, the
proportion of individuals who never seek care prior to dying from HIV.
This can be thought of as the “view” from the community. It allows us to
consider all HIV-positive individuals and their personal experience of
care prior to an HIV-related death. This is easy to quantify in the
model, but it is more difficult to accurately assess cause-specific
mortality in the field. Additionally, the care experienced by
individuals who suffer HIV-related deaths is likely to be significantly
altered by interventions aimed at strengthening care. Therefore, we also
consider the “view” from the clinic, looking at the care experience of
all individuals initiating ART. It allows us to understand from the
clinics perspective the experience of patients who have engaged with
care. This can easily be measured by an ART clinic to assess the current
state of practice. The impact of interventions aimed at improving care
can also be measured by assessing changes from both the community’s and
the clinic’s perspective. For example, the model can calculate the
impact of an intervention and if the intervention were then to be rolled
out, a clinic would be able to validate the intervention against the
model output.

The differences between these two viewpoints are important for assessing
the current state of an ART-programme. From the clinic’s perspective, an
individual’s first contact with the clinic is to receive either an
HIV-test or to be bled for their initial CD4 count. The clinic can
easily trace patients from this point onwards. However, the clinic is
unaware of HIV-positive individuals that never seek care. Thus, the
community’s viewpoint allows us to look at the larger denominator of all
HIV-positive individuals and their experience of care.

Intervention Development
------------------------

To further understand where care in western Kenya is suboptimal, we
designed 12 interventions targeting various points throughout HIV-care.
Each intervention is summarised in table 1 and detailed in full in the
appendix. Where possible, each intervention has two scenarios: a
“maximum impact” scenario illustrating the best possible impact of the
intervention and a “realistic impact” scenario, which aims to
demonstrate the impact of a more obtainable intervention. Interventions
were implemented in the model from 2010 onwards and their impact on
DALYs averted, costs accrued and the care experience of individuals
dying from HIV-related deaths quantified.

  ----------------------- ------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------
  **Intervention type**   **Intervention**               **Maximum Impact**                                                                                                     **Realistic Impact**                                                                                       **Cost **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           **(2013 USD)**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           

  *Testing*               ***HBCT***                     Every four years, 90% coverage of population. 100% linked to care.                                                     Every four years, 90% coverage. 5.4% linked if never diagnosed, else 25%.                                  \$18 per HBCT person tested.

                          ***Enhanced VCT***             The rate of HIV testing is twice that of baseline.                                                                     The rate of HIV testing is 125% that of baseline.                                                          \$50 per person tested.

  *Linkage*               ***HBCT (with POC)***          Ever four years, 90% coverage of population. POC CD4 reduces risk of not linked to 0%.                                 Every four years, 90% coverage of population. POC CD4 reduces risk of not linked by 50%.                   \$60 per HBCT person tested.

                          ***Facilitated Linkage***      The risk of failure-to-link is reduced to 0%                                                                           The risk of failure-to-link is reduced by 50%.                                                             No additional costs applied.

                          ***VCT POC***                  At VCT testing, a POC CD4 test is given to patients reducing the risk of not linking to 0%.                            \$80 per POC CD4 test.

  *Pre-ART Retention*     ***Pre-ART Outreach***         In the middle of each year, 100% of tested individuals lost from care are returned.                                    In the middle of each year, 20% of tested individuals lost from care are returned.                         \$19.55 per patient sought.

                          ***Improved Care***            The risk of a patient missing an appointment is reduced to 0%.                                                         The risk of a patient missing an appointment is reduced by 50%.                                            No additional costs applied.

                          ***POC***                      A POC CD4 test reduces loss from care between CD4 test and result by 100%, as bleeding and result are instantaneous.   \$70 per POC CD4 test.

  *On-ART Retention*      ***On-ART Outreach***          In the middle of each year, 100% of patients who have initiated ART and been lost from care are returned.              In the middle of each year, 40% of patients who have initiated ART and been lost from care are returned.   \$19.55 per patient sought.

                          ***Adherence***                At ART initiation, all individuals adhere to ART and become virally suppressed.                                        At ART initiation, 87.5% of individuals adhere to ART and become virally suppressed.                       \$33.54 per person per year.

  *Sweeping Changes*      ***Immediate ART***            No pre-ART care, all individuals who enter care are treated immediately.                                               No additional costs applied.

                          ***Universal Test & Treat***   Immediate ART & HBCT                                                                                                   Immediate ART & HBCT, but 20% fail to start ART and 20% fail to link to ART                                \$18 per HBCT person tested.
  ----------------------- ------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------

<span id="h.dos6ozntvgnl" class="anchor"></span>

Results *(1000 words)*
======================

To assess the current state of ART-programmes in western Kenya, we ran
the model in the absence of any interventions to define a baseline
scenario. At baseline, the only route into the HIV care system is via
testing through VCT or PICT.

After simulating the population of Kenya from 1970 to 2030 and
replicating the HIV epidemic, we assessed the outcomes of patients from
the viewpoint the clinic and the community. As can be seen from figure
2, if we look from the viewpoint of the “clinic”, where we consider the
engagement of individuals with the clinic prior to ART initiation
between 2010 and 2030, we see that 44.33% of patients that engage with
the clinic are retained until they initiate ART. However, 41.20% of
patients are eligible at first contact with the clinic and are initiated
onto ART immediately. Among patients that engage with pre-ART care, are
lost to follow-up but subsequently re-engage with care, only \<1% are
not eligible for treatment at return to pre-ART care.

Looking at the care history of all HIV-positive individuals who died
from an HIV-related death between 2010 and 2030 from the “community”
perspective, we see that the majority of HIV-related deaths (57.11%) are
from individuals who were diagnosed but failed to start treatment.
Nearly 20% of individuals in the community were never even diagnosed as
HIV-positive before suffering an HIV-related death. Among the \<24% of
individuals that initiated ART, the majority died after disengaging from
ART care, with the remainder dying as a result of the late initiation of
ART (with a CD4 count at initiation of \<200 cells/µl) and only a very
small proportion dying after initiating ART on-time.

To gain further insight into the state of current ART-programmes in
western Kenya and understand where care is suboptimal, we applied each
of our 12 interventions in turn and assessed the impact on DALYs
averted, compared to baseline, and the additional cost of care, compared
to baseline, between 2010 and 2030 (figure 3). From a univariate
analysis of the interventions, if we consider only the impact of each
intervention on averting DALYs between 2010 and 2030 (x-axis, figure 3),
we see that Universal Test and Treat is by far the most impactful
intervention (5,587,234 DALYs averted between 2010 and 2030), as this
intervention does away with pre-ART care completely initiating all
HIV-positive individuals onto ART immediately and actively seeking
infected individuals through HBCT. The second most impactful
intervention is Immediate ART (3,616,936 DALYs averted), followed by
HBCT with POC CD4 testing (3,534,967 DALYs averted). These three
interventions are large scale hard hitting interventions that actively
seek individuals and in the case of Immediate ART and Universal Test and
Treat, remove pre-ART care completely. The remaining interventions are
less impactful but highlight important issues in the dynamics of HIV
care. For instance, the ART Outreach and Adherence interventions are not
particularly impactful (744,915 and 697,265 DALYs averted, respectively)
due to weaknesses in care upstream, many individuals never initiate ART
(\>75% of all HIV-related deaths between 2010 and 2030).

Working through the interventions in groups, the maximum impact scenario
of HBCT is much more impactful than the VCT intervention (1,882,403 and
615,857 DALYs averted, respecitvely); however, the realistic scenario of
the HBCT intervention (imperfect linkage to care) highlights the
importance of linkage after HBCT as this is less impactful than the
maximum impact VCT intervention (431,574 and 615,857 DALYs averted,
respectively). Yet, both scenarios of the HBCT intervention are more
than twice as expensive to implement than the VCT intervention (\$2.62b,
\$2.06b and \$898.44m (2013 USD), respectively).

Among the linkage interventions, HBCT POC CD4 is the most impactful as
it combines HBCT with a POC CD4 test to alert HIV-positive individuals
of their eligibility for treatment (3,534,967 DALYs averted). This is
the second most expensive intervention due to the cost of POC CD4 test
kits and the cost of actively seeking individuals at home (\$3.13m
between 2010 and 2030). Interestingly, the VCT POC CD4 intervention
averts more DALYs in the twenty-year period than the Linkage
intervention (1,434,508 vs. 815,994 DALYs averted). This is due to the
VCT POC CD4 intervention providing perfect linkage to care with the
addition of a POC CD4 test; this also explains the difference in cost
between the two interventions (\$527.20m vs. \$294.73m).

The pre-ART retention interventions each have quite an impact on
averting DALYs, indicating that they are remedying a weakness in care.
Of these interventions, the maximum impact scenario of Improved Care,
the intervention preventing loss from pre-ART care was most impactful
(1,949,321 DALYs averted), followed closely by the maximum impact
scenario of the Pre-ART Outreach intervention that re-engages anyone
lost from pre-ART care (1,825,372 DALYs averted). Interestingly, the
maximum impact Improved Care intervention is only slightly more
expensive than the maximum impact Pre-ART Outreach intervention; this is
likely due to the cost of additional testing retaining individuals in
pre-ART care incurs (\$983.26m vs. \$689.03m). If we compare the POC CD4
intervention against the VCT POC CD4 intervention, we see that the POC
CD4 intervention is less impactful and also cheaper than the VCT POC CD4
intervention (1,352,379 DALYs averted at a cost of \$498.27m vs.
1,434,508 DALYs averted at a cost of \$527.20m). The reasoning behind
this is that the VCT POC CD4 intervention immediately links all
individuals testing through VCT and provides them with a POC CD4 test;
whereas, the POC CD4 intervention applies only to individuals who have
entered pre-ART care. That is, patients that have successfully linked to
care. Thus, without perfect linkage POC CD4 testing involves testing
fewer individuals. As previously mentioned, the ART retention
interventions are not quite so impactful as few individuals ever
initiate ART. However, both scenarios of the ART Outreach intervention
are more impactful and more expensive (by increasing the total
life-years spent on ART) than the Adherence interventions.

***Figure 4: Multivariate analysis***

After investigating the impact of individual interventions on reducing
life-years lost to HIV, we looked at multiple combinations of
interventions. Our results from the univariate analysis indicate that
there is no single high-impact low-cost intervention, highlighting that
there is no single point of weakness along the cascade of care but
rather deficiencies throughout. Therefore, a combination of
interventions improving care at multiple points may prove to be
cost-effective.

We began by assessing the results of the univariate analysis (figure 3)
to find the most cost-effective intervention; that is to say the
intervention with the lowest cost per DALY averted. For these analyses
we only focused on the realistic scenario of interventions. The most
cost-effective individual intervention was ART Outreach (\$310 per DALY
averted). To understand how a combination of interventions could be
utilised to improve care, we applied the ART Outreach intervention at
baseline and simulated the effect running each of the remaining
interventions in turn to assess the most cost-effective combination of
two interventions. A combination of ART Outreach and POC CD4
interventions was found to be most cost-effective (\$346 per DALY
averted). We repeated this process multiple times to identify an
expansion pathway of interventions improving care (figure 4). The most
cost-effective combination of six interventions averts DALYs at a cost
of \$353 per DALY averted (2013 USD). The interventions used are ART
Outreach, POC CD4, VCT POC CD4, Linkage, Pre-ART Outreach and Adherence.
These interventions, strengthening linkage, pre-ART retention and ART
retention, improve greatly improve care and reduce the total DALYs
accrued by HIV-positive individuals. If we compare the cost and impact
of our combination of interventions (figure 4), with the results of our
univariate analysis (figure 3), we see that our combination of
interventions produces 88% of the impact of the realistic Universal Test
and Treat intervention (4,450,326 vs. 5,078,370 DALYs averted) at 44% of
the cost per DALY avereted (\$363 vs. \$803 per DALY averted), shown in
figure 5.

Discussion *(1500 words)*
=========================

-   ***What questions am I attempting to answer? Let this guide the
    analysis.***

    -   ***Intervening at ONE point is not the answer (due to upstream /
        downstream leaks). Need to act at multiple points
        simultaneously.***

    -   ***Point illustrated by figure 4 (impact of combination of
        interventions vs. single intervention).***

-   Review existing interventions acting to strengthen care (from
    literature) focusing on individual interventions acting on care.
    More impactful interventions are indicative of a weaknesss being
    patched…

-   Why is one intervention better than another etc. Why POC CD4 not as
    good as VCT POC CD4 etc.

-   Highlight how a combination of interventions will be crucial to
    maximising health benefits and being cost effective in doing so...
    strength of the approach shown in figure 4.

-   Many current interventions only focus on one area of the cascade and
    don’t consider the downstream impacts. (upstream constraints limit
    the potential of many interventions).

-   Combination of interventions identified improve the entire spectrum
    of care.

-   Future interventions could be designed to impact the cascade in its
    entirety - e.g. integration of HIV services, food incentives,
    patient navigators.

-   Lack of current studies testing interventions aimed at key
    populations

-   Discuss care cascade in other infections: TB, Malaria etc.

-   Argue why modelling the cascade is much more important than simply
    “eyeing the data”.

-   To mention: if you look at the relative **time** spent in each
    stage.. perhaps indicative that ART care is more important to focus
    on as it is LT - However, this is not the case as so few individuals
    actually ever initiate ART (\~13%).

-   Illustrate how figure 4 shows the various pathways to improving
    health outcomes, improving patient survival, reducing HIV-related
    deaths in three scenarios, with the third being the most cost
    effective.

Shift in HIV thinking… acquiring characteristics of LT chronic disease
and non-lethal. {vanSighem:2010gw} [useful!?]

How does time impact the relative importance of leaks in care - i.e. is
a small leak in ART care worse than a large leak in pre-ART care, as
people spend many years in ART care?

-   **Strengths** of this work:

    -   Model accurately describes natural history of HIV

    -   Cascade events are calibrated using unique dataset that enables
        us to track individual patients through time allowing us to
        understand the various pathways taken through care.

    -   Model replicates national HIV prevalence for Kenya from 1970
        onwards.

    -   The model allows us to apply interventions to reduce the losses
        occurring in care and quantify the impact.

    -   Applying an intervention at one point may have considerable
        downstream effects, something that only a model can elude to.

-   **Limitations** of this work:

    -   Only focuses on one location (how generalisable is this to the
        whole of Kenya? / SSA?).

    -   Could the structure / construction of the model biased in
        anyway?

    -   Assumptions regarding care seeking behaviour? (major driver
        behind getting individuals into care) - mention that future work
        will focus on this.

> The hypothesis of treatment fatigue has been raised, in which patients
> that feel “healthy” may discontinue treatment or fail to initiate as
> they feel it unnecessary{Nachega:2014ks, Katz:2011er}. [Useful for
> discussion / limitations of interventions on care].

-   Clinical relevance:

    -   Are these interventions feasible?

    -   If the funding were available, how can this be implemented by
        planners on the ground? (suggest implementation strategies /
        time frames)

        -   Could even look into a graded roll-out of interventions over
            time. Say, the addition of a new intervention each year?

-   Key implications of this research:

    -   Weaknesses exist in this specific ART-programme in western
        Kenya.

    -   Current funding for ART could be more impactful if these
        weaknesses in care were addressed and resolved.

    -   Multiple interventions acting on various aspects of care are
        likely to be more effective than a single intervention.

    -   Tiering interventions?

-   Generalisability:

    -   This research only focuses on one location so the results are
        not generalisable to the entirety of sub-Saharan Africa.

    -   However, these results provide some insight into the likely
        situation of many ART-programmes.

    -   Future research in different locations will allow for
        interventions to be tailored for a specific site, and also to
        provide a more up to date picture of the state of ART-programmes
        in sub-Saharan Africa.

-   How can future research build on these observations:

    -   AMPATH are highly unique in having collected a large database
        from many sources that has the ability to link patients from
        various stages of care. This has allowed them to track an
        individual patient over time from initial diagnosis through the
        various events that make up HIV-care.

    -   The ability to track patients over time is key, more studies are
        required reporting this type of data.

    -   This will allow us to track population health over time, as well
        as assess the impact of interventions that may be being rolled
        out.

    -   Future research can identify losses in care in other locations
        in SSA, together with identifying whether a different set of
        interventions may be more impactful in another location.

    -   Future research may also test the impact of the interventions
        suggested in this location to further validate the model
        results.

-   Future work:

    -   Calibration of model to a new location.

    -   Comparison between two or more locations.

    -   Detailed investigation into role of health care seeking
        behaviour.

    -   Assessing the value of the proposed WHO “monitoring and
        evaluation” indicators.

Acknowledgements
================

References
==========

Figure Legends
==============

*Figure 1 - Flow diagram of the cascade of care *

*Figure 2 - Status quo scenario from the perspectives of the clinic and
the community*

*Figure 3 - Cost Impact plot illustrating the cost and impact of various
interventions*

*Figure 4 - Combination of approaches for improving health outcomes for
patients*

*Table 1 - Summary of interventions acting on the cascade of care*

Supporting Information
======================

**THOUGHTS**

*Potential things to include in introduction:*

-   The interplay between patient behaviour, economic factors and the
    availability of health services plays an important role in
    determining a person's propensity to seek and be retained in
    care{Burns:2014jz}.

-   This “cascade” of losses across all stages of HIV-care means that
    the benefits afforded by ART are not fully realised.

-   Clinic vs. community

-   The widespread scale-up of HIV-testing during the last decade
    together with the increased availability of treatment has shifted
    bottlenecks in care away from the availability of testing and
    treatment to the logistics and organisation of HIV care.

-   With renewed focus on cutting costs and funding constraints on large
    donors, existing HIV care programmes must be strengthened to improve
    the cost-effectiveness of treatment.

-   WHO Guide and Tools for programme managers to collect data on
    Cascade
    [[*link*](http://applications.emro.who.int/dsaf/EMROPUB_2014_EN_1639.pdf)]

-   Inclusion of Jain et al. (2014) paper on ART delivery among
    asymptomatic people initiating with CD4 \>350 cells. [Not randomized
    and likely only treatment-KEEN people].

*Clinic level programmatic measures of success (if the intervention is
successful, what will the clinic see? Increase in throughput? More drug
stockouts? Higher CD4 at entry to care / ART initiation?) [this will be
useful for the figure 2 narrative. [perhaps place this in results]*

***Additional Figures***

![](media/image11.emf)
