---
title: |
    <span id="h.lozhs2hilzr2" class="anchor"></span>Evaluating Strategies to
    Improve HIV Care Outcomes in Western Kenya
...

*Running Head: Strategies to Improve HIV Care Outcomes in Kenya (41
characters).*

*Author List: [TBC]*

***1** Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College
London, London, United Kingdom, **2** Faculty of Health Sciences, Moi
University, Eldoret, Kenya, **3** Center for Statistical Sciences, Brown
University, Providence, United States*

*Corresponding Author: [TBC]*

*Word Count = Aim is 4,000 words*

Abstract 
=========

Background:
-----------

Methods & Findings:
-------------------

Conclusions:
------------

Introduction (*1000 words*)
===========================

The predominant focus of HIV funding over the last decade has been on
improving access to antiretroviral therapy (ART); with the latest
reports indicating that over 9 million people are receiving ART in
sub-Saharan Africa{UNAIDS:2014ta}. With proper adherence, treatment can
increase life-expectancy such that it approaches that of an HIV-negative
individual{Nakagawa:2013cv}. Therefore, we might expect that with access
to ART, the life-expectancy of HIV-positive individuals would increase
dramatically; yet this does not appear to be the case, with life-years
still being lost to HIV{Collaboration:2008ed}. Additionally, patients
are initiating ART late with CD4 counts far lower than current treatment
guidelines recommend (102 cells/μl at treatment initiation reported in
South Africa between 2001 and 2009, when guidelines recommend initiation
when CD4 decreases below 200 cells/μl{Boulle:2014uj}), highlighting
potential failures in pre-ART care{Boulle:2014uj}. The consequences of
late treatment initiation are suboptimal treatment outcomes for
patients. This has recently caught the attention of donors
organisations, as budget constraints have forced a shift in focus
towards maximising the effectiveness of current ART-programmes[*UNAIDS
Gap Report 2014*].

Accumulating evidence suggests that HIV care is suboptimal not at one
particular point, but across all stages of ART-programmes, as “cascading
losses” have been reported throughout care{Rosen:2011ii}. However, this
issue is not confined to sub-Saharan Africa; substantial losses in care
have also been reported in highly developed countries
too{Nachega:2014ks}. In 2011, a systematic review by Rosen and Fox
illustrated that, in sub-Saharan Africa, the median proportion of
patients retained from HIV testing to receipt of CD4 test results was
just 59%. Of the individuals that received CD4 test results, 46% were
retained until they were eligible for ART, and finally of those retained
until they were eligible for ART, 68% were retained until they initiated
ART. This review marked the first time that losses across the whole of
pre-ART care had been quantified on a large scale. Previous studies
assessing ART care in Mozambique illustrated that, 43.5% of patients
were lost between HIV-testing and enrolling in pre-ART care. Of those
that did enroll in pre-ART care, 22.9% were lost before receiving CD4
testing and of those who were found to be eligible for ART, 68.7% failed
to initiate ART{Micek:2009hs}. Addressing why patients disengage from
care, together with identifying means of returning them will improve
patient outcomes by allowing for the on-time initiation of ART and
retention in ART care.

Visualising the events and pathways taken by individuals through care is
important step in understanding where losses are occurring and how to
prevent them. Often termed, the “Cascade of Care”, this
conceptualisation of an ART-programme allows us to link patient outcomes
to events in time{Kilmarx:2013iy, Hallett:2013ig}. The Cascade of Care
begins with the identification of HIV-positive individuals through
HIV-testing. This involves the patient either seeking care voluntarily
at a voluntary counselling and testing clinic (VCT), or in a healthcare
setting through provider-initiated counselling and testing (PICT).
Alternatively, the patient may be sought by a home-based counselling and
testing team (HBCT) and diagnosed in their home. Alerting individuals to
their HIV-status is still a challenge in sub-Saharan Africa, with
current estimates showing only 45% of people living with HIV are aware
of their status{UNAIDS:2014ta}. Kenya has made progress towards its goal
of 80% awareness of HIV status, with 72% achieved in
2007{NASCOP:2012tp}. However, the marginal opportunity cost of
identifying individuals increases substantially *[exponentially?]* as
the pool of undiagnosed HIV-positive individuals decreases.
Additionally, gaining insight into the drivers behind care-seeking
behaviour may help inform future HIV-testing strategies{Moses:1994tg}.

Once diagnosed, individuals need to be linked to pre-ART care; meaning
they must attend a clinic to be bled for a CD4 test in order to
determine their eligibility for ART. Kranzer *et al.* define linkage to
HIV care as attending for a CD4 count measurement within 6 months of
diagnosis to assess ART eligibility{Kranzer:2010hp}. In this study, they
found that among 885 individuals tested between 2004 and 2009 in Cape
Town, South Africa, 62.6% were successfully linked to
care{Kranzer:2010hp}. In contrast, we have received data illustrating
that only 8.7% of patients newly tested through HBCT are linked to care
within six months of diagnosis in western Kenya (AMPATH, unpublished).

After successful linkage to care, where the patient is bled for an
initial CD4 count, the patient must return at a later date to receive
the results of the test. This is due to CD4 tests in sub-Saharan Africa
being predominantly lab-based, where the sample must be processed
centrally, with a turn around time of up to two weeks{Larson:2012dq}. In
resource-limited settings travelling to the HIV clinic is expensive and
many individuals have to take a day off work to travel from remote
areas, having a negative impact on their salary{Geng:2010fh}. A study by
Larson *et al*. (2010) found that among individuals who received CD4
tests at a clinic in Johannesburg and were not immediately eligible for
ART, 65% failed to return to receive the results of their CD4 test
within 12 weeks{Larson:2010dz}. Unfortunately, insights into the role of
care seeking behaviour are currently relatively limited; unlike in
tuberculosis (TB) research where several studies have attempted to
identify the drivers behind health care seeking
behaviour{Buregyeya:2011fi, Salaniponi:2000tc, Pronyk:2001uk}. Although,
the distance and cost associated with travelling to an HIV-clinic have
already been cited as reasons why patients disengage from
care{Geng:2010fh, Yu:2007wh, Ware:2009id}. In many cases, pre-ART care
can be rather prolonged, with the patient enduring multiple CD4 tests
and clinic visits prior to ART initiation. This can lead to
care-fatigue, where patients disengage with care as they are not
receiving any therapeutic benefit. This is backed up by findings from
Kenya, in which a CD4 count of \>200 cells/μl at enrollment into pre-ART
care was shown to result in a 3.49 fold increase in the odds of being
lost from care{Geng:2010du}.

Eligibility for treatment is determined by country-specific guidelines.
The latest guidelines from the World Health Organization released for
adoption in June 2013 state ART should be initiated when a patient’s CD4
count drops below 500 cells/μl{WorldHealthOrganization:2013we}. After
receiving confirmatory CD4 test results determining ART eligibility,
patients must undergo counselling before initiating ART. In some
settings, owing to the significant losses occurring upstream in pre-ART
care, only 18% of tested individuals have been shown to be successfully
retained in care until ART initiation{Rosen:2011ii}, combined with
multiple large scale studies illustrating CD4 counts of patients
initiating ART being far lower than recommended treatment guideline
values at the time{Nash:2011ki, Boulle:2014uj}, indicate pre-ART care,
in many settings, to be poor at retaining healthy individuals until they
become eligible for treatment.

ART initiation marks the start of lifelong ART care, where a successful
treatment outcome can be achieved through retention in care and
adherence to ART. Unfortunately, this does not appear to be the case in
sub-Saharan Africa where 46-85% of patients are retained 24 months after
initiation{Rosen:2007hd}. Another large study analysing over 200
thousand individuals in sub-Saharan Africa showed that retention in ART
care fell from 77.4% at 12 months, to 75% at 24 months and finally to
70.5% at 36 months since ART initiation{Fox:2010gt}. After 24 months
attrition averaged around 5% per year, highlighting long term retention
on ART as an obstacle to achieving optimal patient outcomes in
resource-limited settings{Fox:2010gt}.

Substantial evidence now highlights deficiencies in both pre-ART and ART
care, challenging the traditional idea of linear flow through the
cascade in which patients move sequentially between events. The reported
structural failures and discrepancies of current ART-programmes
therefore suggest that care is perhaps more cyclical than linear; with
this “churn” of patients engaging and disengaging over time{Gill:2009dj,
Hallett:2013ig, Miller:2014ba}. If patients’ initiate ART late, with
very low CD4 counts, after being lost from care, the route back into
care becomes an important target for interventions. Hallett & Eaton
termed these re-engagement routes as “side doors” into care, to
supplement the traditional “front door” route into care through which
care naïve individuals enter{Hallett:2013ig}. This “side door”
distinguishes patients with no previous care experience from those
reconnecting with care, thus allowing us to understand the different
dynamics of these two routes into care. Gaining insight into how these
patients lost from care re-engage, and how care-naïve individuals engage
for the first time is vitally important in terms of repairing and
reinforcing care.

However, the drivers behind patients’ disengagement and reengagement are
ambiguous, and while it has been hypothesised that the development of
symptomatic HIV is likely to be key in pushing individuals to seek care,
data on individuals lost from care is scarce. Currently available data
highlights the need for a consistent definition of “lost to follow-up”,
together with the need for high resolution longitudinal data that will
enable us to map the individual pathways taken by patients through care.

Fortunately, a select few facilities in sub-Saharan Africa are beginning
to collect and distribute this type of data, thereby allowing us to
disentangle the web of routes through care and accurately calibrate
mathematical models to provide insight into the dynamics of the cascade
of care. In this paper we evaluate an ART-programme in western Kenya.
Through the use of mathematical modelling, we identify weaknesses
resulting in suboptimal patient outcomes and demonstrate how
interventions targeting different points of care can improve health
benefits for patients.

*Potential things to include in introduction:*

-   The interplay between patient behaviour, economic factors and the
    availability of health services plays an important role in
    determining a person's propensity to seek and be retained in
    care{Burns:2014jz}.

-   This “cascade” of losses across all stages of HIV-care means that
    the benefits afforded by ART are not fully realised.

-   The current state of care differs if you consider it from the
    clinic’s viewpoint or the community’s viewpoint. [introduce idea of
    looking down the pipe here?]

-   The widespread scale-up of HIV-testing during the last decade
    together with the increased availability of treatment has shifted
    bottlenecks in care away from the availability of testing and
    treatment to the logistics and organisation of HIV care.

-   With renewed focus on cutting costs and funding constraints on large
    donors, existing HIV care programmes must be strengthened to improve
    the cost-effectiveness of treatment.

-   WHO Guide and Tools for programme managers to collect data on
    Cascade
    [[*link*](http://applications.emro.who.int/dsaf/EMROPUB_2014_EN_1639.pdf)]

-   Inclusion of Jain et al. (2014) paper on ART delivery among
    asymptomatic people initiating with CD4 \>350 cells. [Not randomized
    and likely only treatment-KEEN people].

*→ Clinic level programmatic measures of success (if the intervention is
successful, what will the clinic see? Increase in throughput? More drug
stockouts? Higher CD4 at entry to care / ART initiation?) [this will be
useful for the figure 2 narrative.*

Methods *(500 words)*
=====================

*Overview*

We constructed an individual-based micro-simulation to capture the
experience of individuals as they move through the various stages of HIV
care. The first step involved developing a mathematical model that
described the progression of HIV infection with declining health status
and associated mortality. This HIV natural history model was then
expanded to capture the events that make up an ART-programme, the
so-called HIV Cascade of Care.

The natural history model was calibrated using surveillance data from
the literature to accurately describe HIV progression and mortality
prior to ART initiation and immunoreconstitution after ART initiation.
Calibrating the flow of individuals through HIV care in the cascade
model was undertaken by utilising high resolution longitudinal data from
AMPATH in western Kenya, thus allowing us to model the current state of
this specific ART-programme. To understand how costs accrue in an
ART-programme, data was sought that described the cost of the individual
components of care (e.g. Rapid HIV-test or pre-ART clinic appointment).

To assess where care is suboptimal in this specific ART-programme in
western Kenya, the calibrated model was used to replicate the HIV
epidemic together with the scale up of treatment from 2004 onwards.
Output metrics are DALYs averted and cost between 2010 and 2030. In the
absence of any interventions, we were able to define baseline values for
impact and cost. We then explored the impact of a range of interventions
acting at various points along the care pathway. The impact of each
intervention in relation to the baseline scenario indicates the extent
to which health outcomes can be improved for patients, along with the
cost of these improvements. A univariate analysis identified the most
impactful intervention, before multivariate analysis explored
intervention combinations.

Model description
-----------------

The mathematical model we constructed can be described as two submodels:
The Natural History Model and The Cascade Model. These two models work
to describe the health status of an HIV-positive individual and their
movements through care.

The Natural History Model is described in more detail in the appendix
but briefly, we model infection progression upon HIV acquisition in
terms of declining CD4 counts, the development of WHO Stage defining
conditions and associated mortality prior to ART initiation. Upon
initiating and adhering to ART, CD4 count decline reverses and the
individual recovers from their WHO Stage defining conditions. Mortality
hazards are associated with each health state, so as ART improves
health, the mortality hazard decreases. However, if an individual fails
to adhere to ART, their health declines as if they were not on ART.

We begin the model in 1970 and create an initial cohort of HIV-negative
individuals with an age distribution matching that of Kenya in the same
year. We model population growth, by allowing new individuals to be born
each year. Individuals are exposed to the annual hazard of acquiring HIV
from 1975 onwards, with this hazard updating each year to drive HIV
incidence[*link*]. We start testing HIV-positive and negative
individuals in 2004 along with rolling out ART for eligible individuals.
We used the 2004 WHO Treatment Eligibility Guidelines of a CD4 count
\<200 or WHO Stage IV {WorldHealthOrganization:2005ws}. This is updated
in 2011 to a CD4 count of \<350 or WHO Stage
III/IV{WorldHealthOrganization:2010wj}.

The Cascade Model, shown in figure 1, describes the events and pathways
through care for HIV-positive individuals. Care seeking behaviour in
this model is driven by declining health in The Natural History Model.
As described above, the model begins with care naïve individuals of
undetermined serostatus. Individuals are then tested from 2004 onwards
through one of three routes: HBCT where individuals are sought and
tested at home, VCT where individuals voluntarily attend an HIV-clinic
or PICT where individuals seek care due to being symptomatic or having
had previous healthcare experience. If an individual is found to be
HIV-negative, they do not progress any further through care. They may be
tested multiple times throughout their lives and care will only progress
if they are found to be HIV-positive. The Cascade Model is described in
detail in the appendix.

![](media/image1.png)

<span id="h.iogg3anz8zdv" class="anchor"></span>Figure 1. Model
Representation of the Cascade of Care

Natural History Calibration
---------------------------

The Natural History Model was calibrated using surveillance data sourced
from the literature. A review of the literature was conducted to
identify relevant studies that would enable us to calibrate every aspect
of the Natural History Model. Where possible, data from cohort studies
was utilised; although, in some situations data from observational
studies was used. The full description of each data source used for
calibration of The Natural History Model can be found in the appendix.

Cascade of Care Calibration
---------------------------

To calibrate the Cascade Model describing the experience of HIV-positive
individuals as they move through the various stages of HIV care, we
utilised a unique high resolution longitudinal dataset from western
Kenya. The Academic Model for Providing Access To Healthcare (AMPATH),
based in Eldoret, is made up of Moi University, Moi Teaching and
Referral Hospital and a consortium of North American academic health
centers led by Indiana University working in partnership with the
Government of Kenya.

Since launching in 2006, the AMPATH Medical Record System (AMRS) has
been collecting individual-level data on the AMPATH AIDS-control system,
which has been described as a model of sustainable
development{Einterz:2007js, Tierney:2007th}. Service delivery occurs
through public sector hospitals and health centers run by the Ministry
of Health{Einterz:2007js}. AMPATH has very well established VCT and PICT
programmes, and after trailing the use of HBCT in 2007, officially
rolled it out in 2010{Wachira:2013dc}. Recently, AMPATH is extending
this with their Find-Link-Treat-Retain programme (FLTR); involving
finding all HIV-infected individuals, linking each to care, treating
them with ART and retaining them in care for
life)[[*website*](http://news.medicine.iu.edu/releases/2014/05/ampath-abbvie-hiv-testing.shtml)].

AMPATH’s ability to look back at the care history of individual
patients, through tracing their unique identification number allowed us
to ask very specific questions regarding the flow of individuals through
care. Using data from the Port Victoria catchment area, data analysts at
AMPATH calculated the losses occurring at each stage of HIV care from
2007 to June 2014, and together with the average delay between each
event we were able to extract parameter values that were directly
inputted into the model, together with calibration points such as the
distribution of CD4 counts at ART initiation. Calibration was undertaken
systematically to ensure we were accurate in capturing the changing
dynamics of care. Full details of the Cascade Model calibration can be
found in the appendix.

Cost Derivation
---------------

The cost of the individual components of care was included in the model.
The majority of costs, including the cost of ART care, pre-ART clinic
visits and CD4 lab-based tests, were derived from a multi-country
analysis of 161 treatment facilities across five countries in
sub-Saharan Africa[*MATCH*]. The remaining costs were sourced from the
literature. All costs were adjusted for inflation and location by using
the gross domestic product deflator from the International Monetary
Fund. Including the cost of the individual components of care in the
model allows us to understand how costs accrue in an ART-programme.
Additionally, when interventions are applied, we can see the financial
implications of improving care. Further details of the breakdown of cost
in the model can be found in the appendix.

Output Metrics
--------------

The output metrics from the model were DALYs averted and cost accrued
between 2010 and 2030. We weighted DALYs according to current
HIV-positive health state and ART status. We also looked at the care
experience of individuals who died from HIV-related deaths between 2010
and 2030. Further details can be found in the appendix.

Assessing Losses in Care
------------------------

To assess the current state of our specific ART-programme in western
Kenya, we assessed the total number of DALYs and cost of care that
accrue between 2010 and 2030. This was conducted in the absence of HBCT,
so the only means of entering care was through VCT or PICT. HBCT was
removed as home-based counselling and testing is not currently found in
most ART-programmes in sub-Saharan Africa, therefore providing a more
representative baseline scenario.

The care experience of individuals who died from HIV-related deaths was
also studied in the baseline scenario to identify, for example, the
proportion of individuals who never seek care prior to dying from HIV.
This can be thought of as the “view” from the community. It allows us to
consider all HIV-positive individuals and their personal experience of
care prior to an HIV-related death. This is easy to quantify in the
model, but it is more difficult to accurately assess cause-specific
mortality in the field. Additionally, the care experienced by
individuals who suffer HIV-related deaths is likely to be significantly
altered by interventions aimed at strengthening care. Therefore, we also
consider the “view” from the clinic; looking at the care experience of
all individuals initiating ART. It allows us to understand from the
clinics perspective the experience of patients who have engaged with
care. This can easily be measured by an ART clinic to assess the current
state of practice. The impact of interventions aimed at improving care
can also be measured by assessing changes from both the community’s and
the clinic’s perspective. Changes brought about by interventions can be
calculated by the model and if an intervention were to be rolled out, a
clinic would be able to validate the intervention against the model
output.

The differences between these two viewpoints is important for assessing
the current state of an ART-programme. From the clinic’s perspective, an
individual’s first contact with the clinic is to receive either an
HIV-test or to be bled for their initial CD4 count. The clinic can
easily trace patients from this point onwards. However, the clinic is
unaware of HIV-positive individuals that never seek care. Thus, the
community’s viewpoint allows us to look at the larger denominator of all
HIV-positive individuals and their experience of care. Figure 2
illustrates the different perspectives of the clinic and the community.

Intervention Development
------------------------

To further understand where care in western Kenya is suboptimal, we
designed 12 interventions targeting various points throughout HIV-care.
Each intervention is summarised in table 1 and detailed in full in the
appendix. Where possible, each intervention has two scenarios: a
“maximum impact” scenario illustrating the best possible impact of the
intervention and a “realistic impact” scenario which aims to demonstrate
the impact of a more obtainable intervention. Interventions were
implemented in the model from 2010 onwards and their impact on DALYs
averted, costs accrued and the care experience of individuals dying from
HIV-related deaths quantified.

  ----------------------- ------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------
  **Intervention type**   **Intervention**               **Maximum Impact**                                                                                                     **Realistic Impact**                                                                                       **Cost **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           **(2013 USD)**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           

  *Testing*               ***HBCT***                     Every four years, 90% coverage of population. 100% linked to care.                                                     Every four years, 90% coverage. 5.4% linked if never diagnosed, else 20%.                                  \$18 per HBCT person tested

  *Testing*               ***Enhanced VCT***             The rate of HIV testing is twice that of baseline.                                                                     The rate of HIV testing is 125% that of baseline.                                                          \$50 per person tested.

  *Linkage*               ***HBCT (with POC)***          Ever four years, 90% coverage of population. POC CD4 reduces risk of not linked to 0%.                                 Every four years, 90% coverage of population. POC CD4 reduces risk of not linked by 50%.                   \$60 per HBCT person tested

  *Linkage*               ***VCT POC***                  At VCT testing, a POC CD4 test is given to patients reducing the risk of not linking to 0%.                            -                                                                                                          \$80 per POC CD4 test

  *Linkage*               ***Facilitated Linkage***      The risk of failure-to-link is reduced to 0%                                                                           The risk of failure-to-link is reduced by 50%.                                                             No additional costs applied.

  *Pre-ART Retention*     ***Pre-ART Outreach***         In the middle of each year, 100% of tested individuals lost from care are returned.                                    In the middle of each year, 20% of tested individuals lost from care are returned.                         \$19.55 per patient sought.

  *Pre-ART Retention*     ***Improved Care***            The risk of a patient missing an appointment is reduced to 0%.                                                         The risk of a patient missing an appointment is reduced by 50%.                                            No additional costs applied.

  *Pre-ART Retention*     ***POC***                      A POC CD4 test reduces loss from care between CD4 test and result by 100%, as bleeding and result are instantaneous.   -                                                                                                          \$70 per POC CD4 test.

  *On-ART Retention*      ***On-ART Outreach***          In the middle of each year, 100% of patients who have initiated ART and been lost from care are returned.              In the middle of each year, 40% of patients who have initiated ART and been lost from care are returned.   \$19.55 per patient sought.

  *On-ART Retention*      ***Adherence***                At ART initiation, all individuals adhere to ART and become virally suppressed.                                        At ART initiation, 87.5% of individuals adhere to ART and become virally suppressed.                       \$33.54 per person per year.

  *Sweeping Changes*      ***Immediate ART***            No pre-ART care, all individuals who enter care are treated immediately.                                               -                                                                                                          No additional costs applied.

  *Sweeping Changes*      ***Universal Test & Treat***   Immediate ART + HBCT                                                                                                   -                                                                                                          \$18 per HBCT person tested.
  ----------------------- ------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------

<span id="h.dos6ozntvgnl" class="anchor"></span>Table 1. Summary of
interventions applied from 2010 to 2030.

Results *(1000 words)*
======================

-   ***What questions am I attempting to answer? Let this guide the
    analysis.***

-   After simulating individuals over time from 1970 onwards, we allowed
    HIV-testing and treatment to start in 2004 with the treatment
    guidelines \<200 or WHO stage IV. These guidelines changed in 2011
    to \<350 and WHO stage III or IV.

-   Illustrate current functioning of ART programme in western Kenya in
    the absence of interventions (i.e. without large scale HCT).

-   Discuss losses in care from clinic and community viewpoints. Discuss
    what the model shows us that just “eyeing the data” cannot - how
    losses accumulate across the cascade, ability to quantify impact of
    care through LYL due to HIV.

-   Assess definitions of successful patient outcomes - use as baseline
    values to compare results of interventions with.

-   Demonstrate impact of interventions when applied from 2010 onwards.

-   The results of running the model without any interventions applied
    (baseline) was then compared to a model run with an individual
    intervention applied. The results are shown in figure 3.

-   Discuss results…

-   Figure 4, illustrates the impact of building up interventions to
    achieve maximum impact. Figure 4 illustrates this in three
    scenarios: (1) building up interventions from the start of pre-ART
    care towards ART care (for example, a testing intervention followed
    by a linkage intervention, a retention intervention and then an ART
    intervention), (2) the second scenario looks at building the
    interventions that show the greatest impact by averting the most
    DALY’s between 2010 and 2030. The third scenario (3) involves
    building up interventions by considering the cost of each
    intervention and applying in order, the interventions with the
    lowest cost per DALY averted.

Discussion *(1500 words)*
=========================

-   Review existing interventions acting to strengthen care (from
    literature) focusing on individual interventions acting on care.

-   Highlight how a combination of interventions will be crucial to
    maximising health benefits and being cost effective in doing so...
    strength of the approach shown in figure 4.

-   Many current interventions only focus on one area of the cascade and
    don’t consider the downstream impacts.

-   Future interventions could be designed to impact the cascade in its
    entirety - e.g. integration of HIV services, food incentives,
    patient navigators.

-   Lack of current studies testing interventions aimed at key
    populations

-   Discuss care cascade in other infections: TB, Malaria etc.

-   Argue why modelling the cascade is much more important than simply
    “eyeing the data”.

-   To mention: if you look at the relative time spent in each stage..
    perhaps indicative that ART care is more important to focus on as it
    is LT - However, this is not the case as so few individuals actually
    ever initiate ART (\~13%).

-   Illustrate how figure 4 shows the various pathways to improving
    health outcomes, improving patient survival, reducing HIV-related
    deaths in three scenarios, with the third being the most cost
    effective.

→ Shift in HIV thinking… acquiring characteristics of LT chronic disease
and non-lethal. {vanSighem:2010gw} [useful!?]

→ How does time impact the relative importance of leaks in care - i.e.
is a small leak in ART care worse than a large leak in pre-ART care, as
people spend many years in ART care?

-   **Strengths** of this work:

    -   Model accurately describes natural history of HIV

    -   Cascade events are calibrated using unique dataset that enables
        us to track individual patients through time allowing us to
        understand the various pathways taken through care.

    -   Model replicates national HIV prevalence for Kenya from 1970
        onwards.

    -   The model allows us to apply interventions to reduce the losses
        occurring in care and quantify the impact.

    -   Applying an intervention at one point may have considerable
        downstream effects, something that only a model can elude to.

-   **Limitations** of this work:

    -   Only focuses on one location (how generalisable is this to the
        whole of Kenya? / SSA?).

    -   Could the structure / construction of the model biased in
        anyway?

    -   Assumptions regarding care seeking behaviour? (major driver
        behind getting individuals into care) - mention that future work
        will focus on this.

> → The hypothesis of treatment fatigue has been raised, in which
> patients that feel “healthy” may discontinue treatment or fail to
> initiate as they feel it unnecessary{Nachega:2014ks, Katz:2011er}.
> [Useful for discussion / limitations of interventions on care].

-   Clinical relevance:

    -   Are these interventions feasible?

    -   If the funding were available, how can this be implemented by
        planners on the ground? (suggest implementation strategies /
        time frames)

        -   Could even look into a graded roll-out of interventions over
            time. Say, the addition of a new intervention each year?

-   Key implications of this research:

    -   Weaknesses exist in this specific ART-programme in western
        Kenya.

    -   Current funding for ART could be more impactful if these
        weaknesses in care were addressed and resolved.

    -   Multiple interventions acting on various aspects of care are
        likely to be more effective than a single intervention.

-   Generalisability:

    -   This research only focuses on one location so the results are
        not generalisable to the entirety of sub-Saharan Africa.

    -   However, these results provide some insight into the likely
        situation of many ART-programmes.

    -   Future research in different locations will allow for
        interventions to be tailored for a specific site, and also to
        provide a more up to date picture of the state of ART-programmes
        in sub-Saharan Africa.

-   How can future research build on these observations:

    -   AMPATH are highly unique in having collected a large database
        from many sources that has the ability to link patients from
        various stages of care. This has allowed them to track an
        individual patient over time from initial diagnosis through the
        various events that make up HIV-care.

    -   The ability to track patients over time is key, more studies are
        required reporting this type of data.

    -   This will allow us to track population health over time, as well
        as assess the impact of interventions that may be being rolled
        out.

    -   Future research can identify losses in care in other locations
        in SSA, together with identifying whether a different set of
        interventions may be more impactful in another location.

    -   Future research may also test the impact of the interventions
        suggested in this location to further validate the model
        results.

-   Future work:

    -   Calibration of model to a new location.

    -   Comparison between two or more locations.

    -   Detailed investigation into role of health care seeking
        behaviour.

    -   Assessing the value of the proposed WHO “monitoring and
        evaluation” indicators.

Acknowledgements
================

References
==========

Figure Legends
==============

*Figure 1 - Flow diagram of the cascade of care *

*Figure 2 - Status quo scenario from the perspectives of the clinic and
the community*

*Figure 3 - Cost Impact plot illustrating the cost and impact of various
interventions*

*Figure 4 - Combination of approaches for improving health outcomes for
patients*

*Table 1 - Summary of interventions acting on the cascade of care*

Supporting Information
======================
